dir2fat32
=========

Create a FAT32 disk image from the contents of a directory, without mounting or
root privileges, completely automatically.

Prerequisites
-------------

dir2fat32 requires the following packages to be installed on the host Linux
system:

- util-linux (``fdisk``)
- dosfstoos (``mkfs.vfat``)
- mtools (``mmd``, ``mcopy``)

Quick usage guide
-----------------

Before running the script, you need to prepare the source directory. The
directory should not contain any symlinks or paths with characters that are
illegal on FAT32. Note that file and directory permissions do not really
matter.

Once the directory is prepared, invoke the dir2fat32 script::

    $ ./dir2fat32.sh test.img 200 test
    ==============================================
    Output file:      test.img
    Partition size:   200 MiB
    Image size:       208 MiB
    Sector size:      512 B
    Source dir:       test
    ==============================================
    ===> Creating container image
    ===> Creating FAT32 partition image
    ===> Copying files
      Creating hardware
      Copying bash_functions.sh
      Copying aliases_example.txt
      Copying colors.sh
      Copying alias_manager.sh
      Copying hardware/backlight.sh
      Copying README.rst
    ===> Copying partition into container
    ===> Removing partition image file
    ===> DONE

The above example creates an image file called ``test.img`` that is 208 MiB in
size and contains the contents of the ``test`` directory.

The image has a DOS partition table with a single FAT32 partition. You can
verify this with ``fdisk``::

    $ fdisk -l test.img
    Disk test.img: 216 MiB, 226492416 bytes, 442368 sectors
    Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
    Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
    I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
    Disklabel type: dos
    Disk identifier: 0x23410f22

    Device     Boot Start    End Sectors  Size Id Type
    test.img1       16384 425983  409600  200M  b W95 FAT32

The disk image can be mounted for testing purposes using loopback devices. ::

    $ sudo modprobe loop
    $ losetup /dev/loop0 test.img
    $ sudo partprobe test.img
    $ mkdir -p mnt
    $ sudo mount /dev/loop0p1 mnt
    $ ls mnt
    ... contents of the test directory ...

The logical sector size can be set using the ``-S`` option. The valid values
are the same as for the ``-S`` option for ``mkfs.fat`` command, and those are:
512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384, 32768. For flash-based media such as SD
cards and USB sticks, this value should ideally match the page size for optimal
performance. 

Note that setting the logical sector size too high will **render a technically
incorrect partition image** which has less clusters than a FAT32 partition
should.  This can lead to mounting issues due to the FAT type being determined
solely based on the number of clusters. A warning is shown if the number of
clusters is low::

    ===> Creating FAT32 partition image
    WARNING: Not enough clusters for a 32 bit FAT!

Why is my image larger than the specified size?
-----------------------------------------------

The size of the generated image is always several MiB larger than the specified
size. The specified size is the size of the partition and there is some
overhead as well as 8 MiB offset.

License
-------

This script is released under GNU GPLv3. See the ``COPYING`` file for more
details or visit `<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>`_.
